The Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Pilani Campus, offers the course CS G623: Advanced Operating Systems in the First Semester of 2024-2025. The instructor in charge of the course is     Pratik Narang (email: pratik.narang@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in).

The primary objective of the course is to introduce students to the design and implementation issues of distributed operating systems. The pre-requisite of the course is basic knowledge of operating systems and computer networks. Additionally, students should possess sufficient programming experience in C, C++, or Java programming languages.

This course covers the study of distributed operating systems, which function in environments where independent machines, both hardware and software, are connected over a network. A distributed operating system makes a distributed system behave as a virtual uniprocessor system which is based on the microkernel architecture, wherein user-level processes, separated from the kernel, can run on remote machines. Moreover, the operating system is aware of the machines in the network and can make decisions regarding where to run processes based on the relative speed of the machines.

The primary textbook for the course is "Advanced Concepts in Operating Systems: Distributed, Database, and Multiprocessor Operating Systems," authored by M. Singhal and N. Shivaratri and published by Tata McGraw Hill in 2015. In addition to the textbook, several reference books are recommended for further study. These include "Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms" by A. S. Tanenbaum, "Distributed Operating Systems – The Logical Design" by A. Goscinski, and "Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design" by G. Coulouris.

The topics covered in this course are Basics of distributed systems, time synchronisation, distributed mutual exclusion, deadlock detection, agreement and consistentcy protocols, coordination algorithms.

Distributed mutual exclusion algorithms discussed in this course are Lamport , Ricart-Agrawala, Maekawa’s algorithms, Suzuki-Kasami broadcast algorithm and Raymond’s tree-based algorithm.
Distributed deadlock detection algorithms are Ho-Ramamoorthy Algorithm, Chandy Haas Algorithm, Obermack algorithm.
Agreement and consistency protocols include solutions to the Byzantine agreement problems and Raft.Coordination algorithms include Leader election, Bully algorithm, Election in rings, HS algorithm, Peterson algorithm.

Evaluation for the course includes a mid semester exam, quizzes, assignments, and a comprehensive exam. The mid semester exam is a 90-minute exam and will be held on 7th Oct 2024, closed-book exam that accounts for 25% of the final grade. The quizzes make up 15% of the grade, and the assignments, which are open-book, contribute another 25%. The comprehensive exam, scheduled for 4th Dec 2024, is a 180-minute exam and constitutes 35% of the final grade.
Any notices related to the course will be posted on Nalanda, the institute’s learning management system. For the   mid semester test, make-up tests are generally allowed only in case of hospitalization, with prior permission from the instructor in charge. No make-ups will be given for quizzes and assignments, and students should contact AUGSD/AGSRD for make-up requests related to the comprehensive exam. Students are encouraged to send an email to the instructors to seek time for consultation during the chamber consultation hour.

Distributed operating systems are operating systems for a network of autonomous computers connected by a communication network.
The basic issues in the design of a distributed operating system are the same as in a traditional operating system, viz., process synchronization, deadlocks, scheduling, file systems, interprocess communication, memory and buffer management, failure recovery, etc.

A typical multiprocessor system consists of a set of processors that share a set of physical memory blocks over an interconnection network.
Thus, a multiprocessor system is a tightly coupled system where processors share an address space.
A multiprocessor operating system controls and manages the hardware and software resources such that users view the entire system as a powerful uniprocessor system; a user is not aware of the presence of multiple processors and the interconnection network.